---
layout: post_notes
title:  "Launch! Welcome to my Website"
category: notes
---

This project has been a long time coming. I wanted to have a place to put all the fun stuff I have been working on, both so that I remember what I did and so that I can share it. After many, many hours, here it is! It's still very much a work in progress, but I think it's a good start.

I did a few projects this past year that I think are really exciting. Here are my picks for top five posts from 2015:

* [PHMSA Data Analysis Part 2](/projects/2015/12/25/PHMSA-part2.html): I did my first data analysis project in R! I have been dreaming about doing this project for two years, and the pieces finally fell into place. I'm looking forward to working on this project more next year.
* [CycleHack Twin Cities](/community/2015/06/29/cyclehack.html): I was part of a team that put together an amazing local event as part of an international movement to reduce barriers to cycling. I even got to make an LED project at the Hack Factory! Stay tuned, because my co-organizer Leah and I will be presenting CycleHack Twin Cities at the Winter Cycling Congress here in Minneapolis in February 2016.
* [PyCon](/community/2015/04/16/pycon.html): I received financial aid to attend PyCon in Montreal, so I went to my first big programming conference. It was overwhelming but I met some great people and was really excited that so many sessions focused on culture, diversity, and the "people" side of technology.
* [Data Cubed Installfest](/community/2015/03/07/D3.html): I led the charge of planning and hosting a pre-event for a one-day data conference to help people learn Python and R so they could go to the event ready to use the tools being presented. It was humbling to have such incredible, knowlegable volunteers, and great to hear from attendees that it was exciting and helpful to have this resource.
* [PyLadies Galentine](/projects/2015/02/13/pyladies_galentine.html): I finished my first personal programming project using Python! I used what I learned in an online class to make my own project, which was both challenging and rewarding.

It has been a great year, I'm excited about what I've got planned for 2016, and I'm sure more fun stuff that I can't even imagine right now will come up too.

Since this isn't a blog and there are no comments, if you want to connect you can hit me up on social media! I'd love to hear what everyone else is doing.
